hello hello hello hello there are still
a number of seats
down in front this event was sold out
but not oversold so if you'd like to be
on the next flight we can't help you but
I just want to make sure everybody has
seats if there's a seat near you would
you would you raise your hand stand and
just sing a song if you don't mind just
all right all right well why don't we
yeah the seats here all right well I'm
going to leave it to you but let me then
officially say welcome to Socrates in
the city thank you for coming as you can
see are you are you George Gilder we've
been expecting you how are you George
now you know you're not speaking this
evening but you're going to be speaking
soon very soon there's a seat here for
you if you don't if you don't mind
nobody's looking at you don't worry
that's that's the George Gilder yeah
yeah okay well as I hope you know I am
thrilled about this evening for many
reasons not least because we are sold
out I do have to say that you know to be
sold out is always a good thing and I
don't mean that you're you know sellouts
I mean that we're you understand what I
mean it's not like when Billy Joel did
uptown girl kind of sellout right it's
it's a good kind of sellout thank you
thank you Greg um all right so I guess
that's just a warning that if you're
registering for Socrates we actually do
sellout we're not we're not kidding well
if you cannot come to Socrates in the
city as you can see by the thousands of
cameras we're doing our best to film all
of these in HD and put them on the web
as soon as we can get them edited or the
editors in the room no pressure but as
soon as we get them edited we get them
on the web and we want to get these
wonderful conversations out to as wide
an audience as possible
speaking of who is in the room actually
George Gilder just announced himself and
and we have my friend Jay Richards is
here also these are in my mind future
Socrates in the city speakers I hope
that they can afford
I hope they can afford to accept our
extraordinarily low honorarium but in
any case but I I have to say
speaking of who is in the room we we
have one of the most brilliant authors
of recent decades and now you're all
thinking I'm talking about myself I'm
not I wouldn't put myself in that
category publicly but and I'm not going
to I'm not going to say who it is of
course but I will give you I will give
you his initials I can say his initials
there Tom Wolfe you know you know Tom
Wolfe the man in the white suit seated
right here
I hope yeah
when you become an icon people will
embarrass you there's just nothing you
can do about it it's tough I when I
heard that Tom wolf was going to be here
I immediately I got nervous I
immediately ran out and bought a bespoke
suit for the evening
um and it's very expensive but obviously
I'm going to return it tomorrow uh
honestly before I talk about Steven
Mayer who is our very special guest for
the evening I just had to say one more
thing about Tom Wolfe and I just said
this to him and he doesn't mind I hope
he didn't he pretended not to mind but
uh he wrote a book he's written many
books obviously many huge books the
right stuff bonfire of the vanities
don't applaud he's very shy but there's
a teensy-weensy book that he wrote
called the painted word which I had the
great great joy of reading a number of
years ago and it's it's less than a
hundred pages it is like most of his
stuff just ridiculously entertaining but
what it does is it nails
I mean kills dissects the world of
modern art so spectacularly brilliantly
that there's really nothing more to be
said ever on that subject uh I when I
found out that he was going to be here I
found nine copies of the book so that
those of you who sprint to the book
table can get that and maybe he'll sign
it for you but if you can't get one of
those nine copies honestly it is just
ridiculously wonderful and it's also I
would say definitive as I think I said a
moment ago in what it says it's just
you'll read it you'll know what I mean
you'll never go to MoMA again yes I'm
looking at you and it is it's just
ridiculous it's ridiculous so thank you
for allowing me to embarrass you sir
all right it's so you can open your eyes
now it's over I I want a button before I
talk about Steve I want to thank the
Discovery Institute and especially the
McLellan foundation for making this
evening possible as I've said over and
over again it's not easy for us to do
these events they're expensive a number
of you have been generous with us
over the years and this time I do want
to acknowledge
folks at McClellan and Charlie Phillips
for just making this possible so thank
you so much well and now to the to the
man of the hour the man of the week um
mr. rich little no I almost said mr.
Steven Meyer have trouble with it with
the mr. and dr. the other day this is
not a joke I meant to say Doctor Who and
I said mr. hoo it's the less successful
brother of Doctor Who I looked it up on
the internet but no tonight our special
guest very special guest is dr. Steven
Mayer if you didn't know he is one of
the founders of the so-called
intelligent design movement so we know
that he's terribly brilliant but you may
also know that he's terribly brave
because the ID movement has by its very
existence threatened many of the most
beloved tenets of the powerful
scientific establishment and those in
that powerfully entrenched establishment
have taken every opportunity to try and
strangle this baby in the cradle so to
speak but they have not succeeded
indeed the baby in the cradle managed to
get out of the cradle and first crawled
and walked and is now in fact running
hither and yon merrily spreading havoc
and for your monks ideologically
calcified materialists everywhere and of
course we're going to talk about that a
little bit tonight but what exactly is
the ID movement well I'll ask Steven
wire in just a moment
in the meantime let me tell you about
him he graduated from Whitworth College
in Spokane is that said Spokane
Washington I get that right thank you
with a degree in physics and earth
science and worked for an oil company as
a geophysicist his bio says he worked in
seismic survey interpretation but at one
time or another haven't we all done that
I would say most of us in the room have
worked in that
one time or another not a big deal but
then he got a huge scholarship to get a
PhD at Cambridge University in the
history and philosophy of science and
this is no joke that extraordinary and
life-changing scholarship was awarded to
him by the Rotary Club that is true
right I'm not just playing that for
Laughs
no not the Shriners I heard somebody say
that here the Shriners of course
typically send their people to Oxford
that's just this it's their tradition
yeah so um dr. Myers thesis at Cambridge
offered a methodological interpretation
of origin of life research and well of
course after that he was off to the
races here we are
he founded the Discovery Institute
Center for science and culture in 2002
and is now among other things their
director some of you know dr. Myers
previous book signature in the cell
abbreviated SITC and I will sue you
oh I will yeah I that thing in the New
Testament about not suing the Brethren
that's that's I'm a dispensationalist
that ended that ended when John died I
think so I'm free to sue you and I and I
will sue you
in any case and the book signature in
the cell he examined the mystery of the
origin of life that book was named one
of the top books of 2009 by The Times
Literary Supplement of London which I
would say is about a staggering a
mainstream endorsement as one is likely
to come by it's almost as if Danny
DeVito or Cher had praised the book it's
that it's that big
it's that mainstream of course other
brave souls in academia and elsewhere it
gave it tremendously good reviews and of
course was very controversial dr. Thomas
Nagel professor at NYU praised the
diffusive lee and called it a careful
presentation of a fiendishly difficult
problem for his honesty dr. Nagel was
widely excoriated by the scientific
establishment and I think since dr.
Nagel is at NYU
we want to invite him to speak at
Socrates in the city I think we'll enjoy
that so perhaps somebody can give me his
information but very brave to do for an
NYU professor I think dr. Myers latest
book and the one will focus on this
evening is of course titled Darwin's
doubt which has already been a New York
Times bestseller and again brave souls
in the academic world have stepped up to
offer it high praise dr. mark minimun
paleontologist at Mount Holyoke writes
it's hard for us paleontologists to
admit that neo-darwinian explanations
for the Cambrian explosion have failed
miserably Maier describes the dimensions
of the problem with clarity and
precision his book is a game changer dr.
George Church professor of genetics at
Harvard Medical School writes that a
typo Harvard Medical School really
what's he what's he doing now he he
wrote that Darwin's doubt represents an
opportunity for bridge building rather
than dismissive polarization bridges
across cultural divides in great need of
professional respectful dialogue and
bridges to span evolutionary gaps and I
might add yeah sure
okay so format tonight I will interview
dr. Meyer for about 40 minutes and then
we'll have some time for Q&A that's
where you come in I hope we'll have
microphones set up here before I bring
them up I should say that in 2008 dr.
Meyer famously appeared with Ben Stein
in the documentary expelled no
intelligence allowed some of you may
know that know him from that he's also
been widely featured on innumerable TV
programs all over the spectrum and you
may have seen his most recent appearance
on The Suite Life of Zack and Cody how
about a warm Socrates in the city
welcome for dr. Steven Mayer
in your words and it's kind of funny to
ask the founder of something what what
does intelligent design the movement
mean well the theory of intelligent
design is the idea that there are
certain features of life and the
universe that are best explained by a
purpose of intelligence rather than an
undirected material process such as in
the realm of biology natural selection
acting on random mutations now that's a
mouthful to kind of a definition but I
can unpack that a little bit one way to
do that is to contrast intelligent
design with that specific meaning of
evolution that the theory was designed
to challenge okay there are three
meanings of evolution three basic
meanings one is change over time and
that can refer to the fact that life is
different now than it was a long time
ago we do not have the t-rex running
down Fifth Avenue
we don't have trilobite s' out in the
Atlantic Ocean things things are
different now than they used to be that
change over time concept can also refer
to the observable modest changes that we
see taking place in the structure of
organisms the famous Galapagos finches
when the weather patterns changed in the
Galapagos while back is documented that
the the birds with slightly longer beaks
did better than the ones with shorter
being so you got a cyclical variation in
the shape and size of beaks so that's
also an idea of change over time or
evolution in that sense and and those
the meaning the idea of change over time
is not really contentious or disputed
second meaning of evolution is it would
be futile most and young earth
creationist well possibly you know
they're all right they're not allowed
into this but well they would they're
ready but a question of how how long the
timescale was involved and I'll change
those a but the basic idea just so
everybody's tracking the basic idea of
change over time that life forms have
changed over the millennia eons is not
generally disputed not generally to
spend that intelligent design we're
certainly not disputing everything
absolution right would say that that
happened right exactly
second meaning of evolution is the idea
of common ancestry and that can refer to
a universal common ancestry the idea
that all organisms are connected by what
Darwin called descent from modification
from this one single simple form simple
primordial form way back when or it
could be a more limited thesis that
certain groups of organisms are related
by common ancestry but the Darwinian
idea was that the picture the history of
life is best represented as a as a kind
of Tree of Life and he he actually drew
a tree in the origin to depict this
where the branches at the top of the
tree represent all the forms of life
that exists today the trunk or the root
of that tree represents that first
primordial form and the ones that only
made it halfway up are the ones that got
extinct so it's a it's a visual
depiction of his idea about the history
of life and and intelligent design is
not challenging that either although
there are advocates of intelligent
design who are skeptical about that
right and there in fact are assigned
other scientists we're not a user so
you'd consider even common descent to be
a theory not necessary it's an attempt
to interpret certain facts that we have
left behind and certainly no one saw
that whole history so it's a
reconstruction based on the facts that
are left behind and it's one of many
possible reconstructions but it's it's
not what intelligent design is
challenging either the intelligent
design is challenging the third meaning
of evolution and that's the idea that
there is an unguided undirected process
known as natural selection acting on
random mutations that has produced all
the forms of life we see but also has
produced the appearance of design that
all biologists acknowledge or nearly all
biologists acknowledge Richard Dawkins
world's foremost spokesman for so called
neo-darwinism the modern textbook
version of darwin's theory says that
life is that biology rather is the study
of complicated things that give the
appearance of having been designed for a
purpose how clever of them it's it is
the counterintuitive nature of the
Darwinian idea that things look yes they
look design
that beautiful structure of the coiled
nautilus or those intricate molecular
machines or the the chambered structure
of the heart well it's it's plumbing and
wiring many many things in biology look
as though they were designed but the
idea is that they were produced by an
undirected unguided process that
produced the appearance of design so
they would say natural selection has the
power to mimic the natural selection
mimics the powers of designing
intelligence but it is not designed or
guided in any way that's the leading
proponents of Darwinism will say that we
have design without a designer we have
the appearance of design because that
what is called blind Darwinism well
sometimes it's called the blind
watchmaker hypothesis after the title of
one of Dawkins's famous books and so
intelligent design is challenging that
and the title or the the term
intelligent design was selected
intelligently if you will to make clear
which of those three meanings of
evolution we're challenging explicitly
we think things that there are certain
features of biological systems that were
actually designed and you can tell by
examining the scientific evidence a so
just so that everyone's tracking with
you and so that I'm tracking with you
I'm going to repeat back to you what you
just said but not tonight not because I
think that in the popular well popular
culture these distinctions are never
clearly made you would get the idea that
there are two theories one theory is
that we were created 11,000 years ago
and Shazam here we are the other theory
is the scientific theory that says
everything happened by random forces and
that we evolved out of the primordial
soup and here we are and there is
absolutely no God involved in that
process but what you're saying now and
obviously what I've read about is that
there there are so many variations
between those two polls and so
intelligent design as I understand it is
says that yes this happened there were
trilobites four billion years ago and
things have quote-unquote
evolved things have changed
maybe I want to use the word involved
because it's a little bit loaded but
things have in fact changed we can see
this we can observe this in in the
fossil record basically but blind
Darwinists neo-darwinism at lea no
designer or intelligent agent of a no
agent it was just utterly random and it
was something that Eric I prefer the
term undirected or mindless okay because
and and and why well because you could
have something that's random that
appears to be random to us that actually
has a hidden hand behind it and the
darwinian x' insist that the appearance
of design is an illusion all right if
it's an illusion it follows logically
that the process that produced the
appearance of design was not mindful it
was unguided and undirected right and so
that's the crucial tenant and the this
idea is actually hard baked into the
logic of Darwinism when you go to the
third chapter of the Origin of Species
Darwin uses an interesting analogy to
artificial breeding experiments that you
know ranchers and farmers have been
doing from time immemorial where where a
farmer Rancher could choose a particular
trait that he wanted to see maximized or
enhanced in the you might think of sheep
in the far north of Scotland and if you
wanted a knight woolly or greed of sheep
you would you would select the wiliest
males and the Woolies females to breed
and Darwin would and then generation
after generation
you'd get woolly and woolly sheep this
is a well-known phenomenon
nineteenth-century biologists knew all
about this Darwin came along and said
well what if he had a series of very
cold winters such that all but the
wiliest died out wouldn't you get the
same effect and so he proposed natural
selection as an alternative to
artificial selection to intelligently
driven selection so the mechanism was
meant to exclude a designer in the very
way he formulated the theory and so
that's so that's been the big issue
design or no design designer apparent
design well I guess what I find so
fascinating by this and one of the
reasons I was so happy to get you to
come here is that
it's ironic I would say at least ironic
that the scientific establishment today
is as hidebound in a way and as said
earlier calcified in their ideology that
they're not even willing to be slightly
open to the possibility that there might
be an intelligent force and so they have
been tremendously dismissive as I
understand it of the intelligent design
movement
I mean you lived this why do you think
that is well I have a friendly debating
colleague who is a Darwinist Michael
ruse who says that he's written an
important book in which he explains that
Darwinism is function is something of a
secular religion for many scientists and
many scientists I think that have had
difficulty distinguishing what you might
call materialistic philosophy from the
enterprise of science itself so if you
have a theory that has non materialistic
implications or which challenges a
theory that does have decidedly
materialistic implications there's an
implied threat to a deeper worldview or
metaphysical understanding of reality
and I think all of us respond when our
fundamental belief systems there are
challenged sometimes with some passion
so their objections are irrational and
religious I wouldn't say they're
irrational but I think that the level of
response is that the passion of the
response is understandable from this
because of the big issues that are in
play are you naturally this kind or do
you just realize that you haven't you
have to be diplomatic I have to say no
that it's the more the more I have
looked at it I've been staggered by the
well how do I put it the lack of
scientific rigor in that kind of
thinking or maybe say I can't give him a
number of it you know some of the the
week my book was released it was
released on his eBook this room most
recent one June 18th earlier than summer
by three o'clock in the morning there
were about a dozen of these one-star
hostel reviews and some of the turns of
phrase were just choice mendacious
intellectual pornography right steaming
pile of pseudoscience at it and that
kind of thing so
by people who clearly had read the book
very carefully and the day after the
book was released there was a 94 hundred
word review on June 19th the book is 400
pages plus with notes and and so you
could this is struck a nerve there
people lying in wait so well I'd say
that's a compliment
I think that the other thing that one
hears and also I have heard it is that
this is not science and and and what
these people seem to do and again I you
don't have to take a position on what
you believe but the idea that that
they're so closed-minded that they would
simply say it's not science and are
unwilling to discuss it I guess I wonder
what they think science is because if if
logic and evidence leads you to surmise
that yes perhaps there was intelligence
behind this that there's design it's
it's illogical and a scientific
conclusion so to say that you can't you
can conclude anything but that is is
just strange to me and it seems to me
that they have this idea that anything
that kicks against that shakes up this
materialist radiology really religion is
unacceptable and so they say it's not
science and because most of these folks
are part of the powerful scientific
establishment they can they can say that
so I guess I want to ask you what to you
what what is science to you well this is
part of what I I studied in my
dissertation years in Cambridge that it
turns out that there's a lot of talk
about the scientific method but it turns
out there are there are actually many
different scientific methods and I
studied very intentionally or
consciously the the method that Darwin
used in reconstructing the ancient past
discussions of biological origins are in
the end discussions of Natural History
and there's a particular method of
scientific reasoning that scientists use
when they're trying to study events in
the remote past you can't make a
trilobite re-emerge under controlled
laboratory conditions so the kind of
science that
physicists or chemists do in a
laboratory is not going to be applicable
to studying the ancient past what Darwin
did was pioneer essentially a method of
forensic science where the clues that
are left behind are used to reconstruct
what happened in the ancient past and he
had an important rule of reasoning which
was that if you're trying to explain an
event in the past you want to invoke
causes which are as his mentor Charles
Lyell put it now in operation want to
invoke causes that are known to have the
power to produce the effect in question
now I had become fascinated in the mid
80s with this problem of the origin of
biological information it turns out that
organisms are chock full of digital
codes stored in the DNA molecule and
other forms of information stored
elsewhere and there is a complex
information processing system at work
inside organisms that allows them to
function and survive so if you want to
build a new cell if you want to build
life in the first place or if you want
to build an animal you have to have the
evolutionary process would have to
produce a great deal of information but
that was the very question that was
bringing a lot of evolutionary theories
to a point of impasse and so I began to
think about this what is the cause now
in operation that produces digital code
that produces information and I realize
there's only one and that causes
intelligence or mind in other words what
we know from our uniform and repeated
experience the basis of all scientific
reasoning is that intelligence produces
information whether we find it in a
hieroglyphic inscription or a paragraph
in a book or a section of software code
whenever we find information and trace
it back to the source
always come to a mind not a material
process and so I realized that by using
Darwin's own method of reasoning and his
key principle of scientific reasoning we
could make a very rigorous scientific
case for intelligent design so when
people say it's not science I want to
say well why it's based on scientific
evidence and we're using us an
established method of scientific
reasoning in fact the very method that
Darwin used if the theory of intelligent
design isn't scientific by that same
logic then Darwin is one-half Darwinism
would have to be excluded from that same
designation I'm sorry could you repeat
that
you said you were fascinated by
something in the mid-eighties I remember
that I it's funny in the mid 80s I was
fascinated with the rythmics I don't
know if you've heard of them in any case
well before we get to your book now I
wanted to actually have to be honest
that was not fascinated by the rhythmic
sat all two before we get your book I
want to ask you about irreducible
complexity that's another one of these
terms that gets thrown around what you
were just saying essentially is that the
things that exist these organisms that
exist are too complex probably too
complex to simply have appeared and it
seems that something with that much
complexity that much information and
when you say information you mean well
digital code yes Watson and Crick 1953
they elucidate the structure of the
famous double helix yeah the DNA
molecule four years later Crick proposes
something called the sequence hypothesis
which is it was the recognition that
there are four chemicals they're called
bases that run along the spine of the
DNA function like alphabetic characters
in a written language for digital
characters in the machine code and and
since then we've learned that that
information is directing the
construction of mechanical parts that's
what helped me but so before Watson and
Crick we didn't know any of this right
and so it was much easier to Oh
what have we done to better sky work
okay good
I'm gonna sing is it okay well what
you're saying I I just want to want to
be sure in other words before Watson and
Crick we did not know about the vast
ridiculous amounts of encoded
information to DNA we didn't know about
the hyper graphic or alphabetic or
digital I mean any of those terms are
apt okay why we have an animation online
which shows the DNA molecule it's the
brighter the helix structure but along
the interior of that molecule there are
these four chemicals and the chemists
I represent them with the letters ATG
and seen depending upon their
arrangement right the molecule is
conveying information for building
different types of proteins and proteins
of little machines themselves that do
all the key jobs yes I mean I remember
at Francis Collins spoke a few years ago
when he was talking about this and that
just the level of complexity is to bring
to that is just absurd it's it's it's
beyond our ability to comprehend and now
that we know that it seems generally
implausible that this just happened that
things of this level of complexity just
happened and so but then there's
something else related I just want to
want to get this out of the way before
we leap into your book but explain this
concept of irreducible complexity right
the case for intelligent design is not
so much made in the negative as well
it's so complex it couldn't have arisen
by an undirected process it's really
made in the affirmative by noting
features in living organisms organisms
that we know from experience are
produced by one and only one type of
cause one of those features is digital
information okay okay that's the
argument that I've developed might be he
has developed a separate argument from
the presence of a feature that engineers
recognize they engineers sometimes talk
about integrated complexity he calls it
reducible complexity and that is a
feature of systems where wherein you
have a great deal a great number of
parts right and if you remove any one of
those parts the whole system ceases to
function right so it could not have
evolved it's not a gradual process it
had to be put together or it wouldn't
work intermediate stages on the way with
he makes famous this little and I kid
you not it's a rotary engine that's
inside the cell wall of bacteria it's
called a bacterial flagella motor it's
high tech and low life and it's got 30
proteins made of 30 protein parts it has
no rings bushings a driveshaft a hook
like propeller that protein that
functions like a propeller and it
rotates at a hundred thousand rpm can
change direction on a quarter turn it's
amazing machine and what has been
discovered by the biochemist working on
this machine is that the the 29 part the
28 part the 27 part version of this is
non viable it doesn't perform any
function Darwin said that natural
selection selects
functional advantage it preserves those
things that pass on a vantage in the
competition for survival
well these intermediate stages have no
functional advantage and so you couldn't
build this up gradually and that's a big
part of this our game I want to ask you
about your book do you mind not at all
because we've got a lot of copies here
we got to move some product the book has
done well it's very very impressive
it's called Darwin's doubt tell us what
does that title mean well Darwin in
contrast to the rhetorical excess of
some of the modern neo Darwin as which
are Dawkins if you find someone who's
skeptical about evolution they're either
ignorant stupid wicked or insane you
know or one of his ex-wives who were all
of the above yeah yeah I mean I don't
know but they taught me an acting class
back in high school to let the the
laughter let's Elektra good I wasn't
saying anything funny anyway he he he
said that no we were talking about I've
no idea the threat he's good
I think Melville was the third wife yeah
and let me see-oh you I know you're
saying about Darwin's doubt it's a book
he wrote right yeah in con in contrast
to Dawkins and crew Darwin was actually
very modest in his expression he
acknowledged difficulties with his
theory and he had a very significant
doubt about one particular class of
evidence it was called an event in
history of life called the Cambrian
explosion ok so what is the Cambrian
explosion you were probably just going
to tell us yeah the Cambrian explosion
is the the geologically abrupt or sudden
or discontinuous appearance of most of
the major groups of animals in the
fossil renders happened around 580
million years ago 530 million is a
5-step say 580 yeah but so in other
words that evolution was not a smooth
process or whatever happened the change
of life forms was not a smooth process
the Cambrian explosion says that
suddenly roughly 530 million years ago
wham all kinds of things happen so
really is not gradual and that's why
they call exactly that second definition
of evolution was the idea of gradual
evolution as represented by the tree of
Larry slow so right out of the chute
you've got something that's challenging
one of the meanings of Darwin's theory
it also challenged his idea of natural
selection and recalled the natural
selection and random variations because
his he envisioned the mechanism of
natural selection and random variation
working very slowly and gradually he
recognized that if there were big
changes from one generation to another
you get deformed organisms so the
changes had to be very small and
incremental which meant the process
needed a great deal of time and what he
saw and yet what he saw in the fossil
record was this abrupt appearance of
these major groups Darwin saw this
Darwin saw even in his day we right he
saw this right now he expected and hoped
that the subsequent fossil finds would
fill in those big gaps but as I show in
the book the the the the gaps have
gotten more pronounced and the
discontinuity is is more pervasive okay
so yes as time has passed we since
Darwin write a fossil record has in fact
shown the opposite of what he hope the
ancestral precursors have not turned up
in the Precambrian layers and in the
Cambrian we've discovered many more
exotic creatures with lots of intricate
organs and structures and body plans
that were unknown to Darwin that have
been discovered in that same seam of
rock all the way around the world the
most dramatic finds of which are in the
burgess shale and canada and amazing
find in southern china you know in the
in the last couple decades so what are
so the explosion has become more
explosive basically okay a frightening
yeah well okay so why is the book titled
Darwin's doubt he saw this he saw this
and what the book does is tell the story
of that doubt and it traces that doubt
it's up to modern times and shows that
the problem that Darwin recognized has
become more acute in two different
respects first the fossil missing what I
call the mystery of the missing fossils
has become more acute as we've
discovered all these new forms of
Cambrian life and all of which are also
missing ancestral forms but the second
mystery that I address in the book is
that I think a deeper mystery it's
essentially an engineering problem
and so the second part of the book is
subtitled how to build an animal
and we what we now know about the
centrality and importance of information
both digital information and other forms
of information to building animals poses
this really difficult problem how can
natural selection acting on these random
changes random mutations generate whole
new stretches of functional genetic code
imagine a computer program that's
performing an important function in your
computer and then imagine randomly
changing the digital bits then ask
yourself a question are you more likely
to by doing that produce a whole new
operating system or computer program or
are you more likely to degrade the
information that's already there since
the 1960's there's been an immense
skepticism of mathematicians computer
scientists and other engineers about the
efficacy the creative power of the
mutation selection mechanism because
they don't see how random changes in
typographic characters is going to
generate a whole new functional
sequences of information so but if there
is debate among people in the Academy
about these kinds of things
why are some scientists or why is the
establishment so dismissive of
intelligent design in other words what
is the internal debate and how does that
play out well I think it's it's hard to
speculate about you know the motives
that people have for some of the extreme
reactions that they offer to this but I
think what you put your finger on before
about the the prior philosophical
commitment to a materialistic form of
science is one of the reasons because
this idea that there is there that there
is a purpose of intelligence behind some
of these key features we see in life
clearly challenges the the matter the
materialist view it's a mind over matter
view of reality in other words the
internal critics people who are saying
this doesn't make sense are not saying
what we think we've got a solution
there's an intelligence behind this
instead what they're saying is we don't
know and we assume there's a materialist
answer that will itself very interesting
letter
from a very prominent scientist I won't
mention him by name now but what are his
initials you did that trick once tonight
and he it was after after the
publication of the first book signature
in the cell and he said I entirely agree
with the scientific analysis you've done
even the RNA world which was the hot
chemical evolutionary idea he said is is
going nowhere and everyone knows it
he said but he said and I'd like to say
more publicly about your book but he
said I'm committed to a materialistic
solution to this problem
so your science is right but we differ
philosophically it was he was saying and
I think that is that is actually the
this the basis of a lot of the the
difference is a very cordial and
respectful guy but a lot of people who
are not are I think they're less aware
of their own materialistic premises in a
way they're conducting well those of us
who are non scientists and I'm an
extreme non-scientist are really unaware
of the debate within the world of
science and other disciplines we it's
not the sort of thing one reads about in
the New York Times or wherever it's just
not the thing the kind of thing we've
been that we would normally be made
aware of or would be aware of and
there's this general sense in the
culture I think that this has all been
decided and figured out and there isn't
much debate that the sciences is settled
so to speak and you know move along
there's nothing to talk about that's
what got me into it when I was at a
particular conference where the the
problems in origin of life studies
chemical evolutionary theory were being
discussed and I had after two science
majors as an undergraduate been under
the impression that all the science was
settled but it's it's far more
interesting than that in the new book I
one of the themes I tell a mystery story
but there's a there's a kind of a
journalistic expose involved in the in
the story as well because I show that
there's a huge disparity between the
public presentation of the status of
modern Darwinian theory
by people at the New York Times or in
all the major science organizations have
committees that pronouncements on this
by the public spokesman for
theory like Richard Dawkins or Jerry
Coyne so there's a huge disparity
between what they say and how they
present them the theory to the public
and what's going on in the peer-reviewed
scientific literature and by that I
don't just mean biology generally I'm
even talking about evolutionary biology
and one of the things I do in the book
is I look at at sit there are six new
theories of evolutionary biology that
have been proposed in just the last few
years by scientists who are breaking
with the textbook orthodoxy of
neo-darwinism some of them are openly
calling for a new theory of evolution
precisely because they recognize that
the that the mutation natural selection
lacks the creative power that has long
been attributed to it let me simply say
wow that's that's pretty amazing
actually it's a story that hasn't been
told well I mean none of this is told I
was amazed just a few years ago I wrote
a book of apologetics and I was looking
into some of this and I was staggered to
find that the some of the stuff that I
took as gospel truth I mean most of us
in school someplace saw the famous
heckle drawings the ontology
recapitulates phylogeny which shows that
in in embryo form all these different
animals look exactly the same and it
shows that you know that we sort of we
come from a common ancestor or whatever
and you know I learned that those
drawings which are so famous and
ingrained in and so many of our minds
were basically fudged and and are no
longer accepted and I was just amazed
because it's you know finding out that
you know Pluto is not a planet which I
just did yeah that's her and and oddly
in that case they were known to be
fraudulent from since in 1894 the famous
Cambridge embryologist Adam Sedgwick
Sedgwick had exposed that almost a
century ago Stephen Jay Gould thought
this was just an appalling recycling of
bad science in our textbooks so I mean
yeah I mean 1894 I was not in school
then it is pretty amazing the same thing
with the the famous I don't know if it's
still there at the Museum of Natural
History the eohippus do you know what
I'm talking about
the horse see that the horse sequence I
don't even know if that's still there
anymore but it seems that it was
same kind of thing basically fudge that
it's not necessarily something that
happened I mean any of this kind of
stuff was big news to me I have to say
and then the idea that there are these
big gaps in the fossil record also not
exactly something that's taught in the
schools at least not where I went to
school well and what you're finding in
the peer-reviewed literature is this
engineering problem as I refer to it you
know is really what's what is generating
a lot of skepticism among evolutionary
biologists because the complexity of
these systems just let me try one little
technical argument see if we can make
this clear it's really fascinating to me
there are these to build an animal it
turns out that you not only need all
this genetic information but there are
circuits and these circuits are crucial
to getting the right cells to
differentiate getting cells to
differentiate from each other and go to
the right place as you're building an
animal is it unfolds from embryo to
adult but there's a problem as we've
done as developmental biologists have
done experiments on this circuitry
they're called developmental gene
regulatory networks they find that even
modest alterations in these circuits
have catastrophic catastrophic effects
but to build a new animal you need new
types of circuitry to make sure that
there's the cells and the other type of
animal get to their right places so to
build one animal form from another you
need a new type of circuit but you can't
alter the original circuit without
destroying the animal during its
development and you have these kinds of
problems I look at four or five of this
these types of really intractable
engineering problems confronting the
evolutionary mechanism and it's one of
the reasons that so many top line
evolutionary biologists are themselves
looking for a new approach
not necessarily intelligent design but
they're saying this this neo-darwinian
approaches is failing us well before we
go to the to the QA I just want to ask
you a couple quick things but the first
one I guess is where do you see all of
this going because when you have this
paleontologist from Holyoke saying that
this is a gear book as a game-changer
there seem to be you know cracks in the
dam it seems clear that this you know
unified front is not as unified as it
once was and it seems to me that there's
a possibility of some shifting around
but what what do you see is there hope
that people in the Academy might accept
some of this I mean it seems hard for me
to believe but I'm just getting some
signs of hopes I'm curious from your
point of view what do you think well I
think it's actually a very exciting
we're not hearing about a lot of it the
media and I think the the metaphor you
used of attempting to kill to kill the
baby in the bassinet was you know
exactly right in the 2004 2005 when the
the work on intelligent design broke
into the public awareness through the
media there was a big trial in Dover and
Wired magazine did a cover story on us
and a lot of media attention the
official line media line was our
narrative was this is a faith-based idea
Time magazine had a cover story that was
the is a faith-based idea but the idea
is actually based on science scientific
evidence and a scientific method of
reasoning and what's what we're now
finding is that there is a growing
subterranean dissent against Darwinism
and many of those scientists are getting
in contact with us and there's a growing
network internationally of scientists
who are contributing to this intelligent
design research program we've talked
mainly about how the evidence might
point to a designer or how it might
challenge Darwinian evolution but once
you're convinced that life is a design
system it leads to experiments and a
different way of looking at life that
may have what scientists call heuristic
value it may lead to new discoveries one
of the predictions that we made for
example that was different than the
Darwinian prediction was the prediction
about so-called junk DNA and last fall
it was confirmed by this massive encode
project that the junk DNA which was
thought to be the detritus the leftovers
from the trial-and-error mutation
selection process turned out to be
importantly functional just as the ID
proponents had had predicted so we think
this leads to in really fruitful
directions of for new science and we're
seeing an awful lot of scientists coming
to us I'd Lee especially Europeans some
very high-profile European scientists
have have sort of joined ranks and so I
think there's a it's a I'm very
optimistic that the this materialistic
ideology is losing its stranglehold on
the practice of science I'm aware of the
junk DNA findings because I follow
Discovery on Twitter I just want to say
that
and yes I do and I guess I want to ask
what I mean
what is Francis Collins's view of the
junk DNA story do you know I mean what
does he come out he when he wrote a book
in 2006 the language of God in which she
made some arguments for the second
meaning of evolution common descent
based on on the non functionality of
certain genes that were present with us
and present with chimps and the argument
is look if these things aren't
performing a function and their
president like in appendix right I mean
yeah something like that or you genetic
it down for us like an appendix it has
no use but it just ended up there
because that's that's what happened and
clearly it wouldn't happen God was not
design us with an appendix why would he
do such a thing yeah and you wouldn't
have you wouldn't had to now that you're
here why would he and and the idea is
you wouldn't have in two different
organisms to essentially broken genes
that aren't doing anything unless they
had a common ancestor and since Collins
wrote that book in oh six a lot of this
has come out some of it in under his
direction he's had his name on a number
of these scientific papers that have
established the functionality of many of
these allegedly broken genes or sections
of junk DNA so I think a lot of those
arguments have to be reassessed and it's
an interesting dynamic area of
scientific conversation but clearly that
the main Darwinian argument I mean I got
this right before I published signature
in the cell there were people writing
papers saying well the if the genome is
designed if the information in DNA
points to an intelligent designer why is
so much of the genome junk right and it
turned out not to be so in fact what's
fascinating to me is that over all that
none those non protein coding regions of
the genome are not junk at all but they
function much like an operating system
in a computer that are regulating the
expression of the data files they are
regulating the timing expression of the
of the information that does build build
proteins so what we're looking at is a
really sophisticated information
processing system in even the very
simplest cells since I mentioned Francis
Collins I just remembered another
question I want to ask you I get
confused when people talk about theistic
evolution I'm going to the impression
that theistic
evolution means that people believe the
process of evolution happened but that
God directed it but then when somebody
says intelligent design it sounds like
the same thing where would intelligent
design differ from so-called theistic
evolution well it really depends on
which meaning of evolution is being
affirmed by the theistic evolutionist
the first meaning of evolution change
over time is is something that certainly
met you it's perfectly coherent to merge
that with a form of theism certainly God
can cause change over time
God could also even cause continuous
gradual change over time though there's
increasing evidence that life on earth
did not emerge in a gradual in a
completely gradual way where I think the
concept of theistic evolution breaks
down is when you try to merge theism
with the idea of an unguided undirected
process not even God can direct an
unguided undirected process because as
soon as God is directing it it's no
longer undirected but what wouldn't they
but wouldn't it I mean it's kind of like
saying you know if I roll the dice right
did God make it say you know Snake Eyes
in this case right um or if he didn't
maybe he didn't but he knew that it
would be snake guys in other words
couldn't that be the case with theistic
evolution isn't that what they say
wouldn't they say that look
yes it's random on one level it's random
and maybe that's why you objected the
word random earlier but it's random but
but God knew that it would go this way
and you're saying that well in a sense
the key question for theistic
evolutionists and and their there are
forms of theistic evolution that are
consistent with intelligent design if
God is directing the evolutionary
process to a propitious outcome that is
a form of intelligent design right so
then the argument is really only over
whether that directed form of evolution
is continuous or more episodic okay and
that's in the metaphysical sense not a
really big big disagreement but the what
I've been calling for is more clarity in
the use of this term because it can mean
so many different things depending on on
on whether
talking about evolution number one two
or three the three the three meanings
that I was talking about I guess I'm
just fast and here was another one other
key point though many theistic
evolutionists are saying that the
mutation selection mechanism is God's
Way of creating right and what I show in
the book is the mutation selection
mechanism has very limited creative
power and so for theists who are looking
for a way to harmonize science and faith
this is a losing strategy this is like
the Catholic Church backing the
Aristotelian cosmology just before
Galileo came along when you have leading
secular evolutionary biologists saying
that that mechanism is a very limited
creative power but when a quote that I
like is a biologist who says that
natural selection explains the survival
but not the arrival of the fittest it
explains the little stuff but not the
origin of whole new body plans or
circuitry or genetic information and so
it's it it to me seems an odd time for
the push within the religious world to
baptize Darwin and say this is the way
God did it when the when the scientific
establishment is while not open to a
theistic or an idee perspective is still
very much becoming disenchanted with the
Darwinian mechanism a so so people so
you would say that that people of faith
who are saying that you know we believe
in evolution this kind of evolution
you're saying that they're they're
backing a loser and they think it makes
them cool you know to back this
particular loser because they don't
think it is a loser but you're saying
that science itself is going to show
that this can't work is already
increasingly doing so absolutely yeah
and so it is a losing horse absolutely
okay all right well I want to open the
conversation up to the folks who've come
but we welcome your questions and I
should say up front that dr. Maier has
asked that your questions if you don't
mind be true or false questions just to
just kind of move it along to move it
along here I love when there are no
questions look at this now you know what
will happen let me predict ah let me
predict that in a moment
at the end of this when we're out of
time there's going to be eight people at
each microphone this always happens
thank you thank you go ahead Mustapha
and Thomas Kuhns book he talks about
paradigms and how you can articulate
paradigms through experiments and my
question is with intelligent design how
do you articulate this particular path
assuming that it is a new scientific
paradigm how do you articulate it
through experiments the reason why I ask
the question is speaking to laypeople
and I'm a laborers myself and not a
scientist when you speak to laypeople
about intelligent design you see this
look on their face like you're not
intelligent but then when you spent them
I know that look yeah whatever yeah when
you speak to them about evolution no
matter how mathematically impossible it
may seem you sound intelligent because
there's this you know sort of mechanism
that we have grown to believe in as the
evolutionary process wait it doesn't
seem to be a mechanism for ID so what
what is the testability of intelligence
absolutely question I address this in
great depth in both books but first a
question the point about mechanism the
the methodological imperative of
historical science is to establish a
cause for events in the past and causes
may be mechanistic they may be material
but they may be ultimately mental they
may be the result some types of effects
only arise from conscious or rational
activity if someone to walk into the
British Museum and look at the rosetta
stone and say isn't it wonderful what
wind and erosion did we would say that
person has missed something important in
the causal story of those inscriptions
and so while intelligent official just
before you get to four it so the rosetta
stone did not just happen it was
produced by an intelligent agent just
one of the cause yeah so we're offering
not a mechanism but an alternative kind
of cause but having but then that raises
the question of testability how would
you test that and there are two aspects
of every scientific theory there are one
aspect is explaining the facts we
already have and one is making
predictions about new facts
turns out that intelligent design does
both and the first much of what I've
done is work on the first problem we've
got a whole suite of different types of
evidences and I show that intelligent
design provides a better explanation of
those already known facts than
undirected material processes of various
kinds and in doing that I use a method
of reasoning that Darwin used known as
inference to the best explanation where
the best explanation is one that cites a
cause which is known to produce the
effects in question so when we're
looking at an inference to the Past
cause one of the key tests is is that
cause is the test of our uniform and
repeated experience in the present is
the cause that we're citing known to
produce the kind of effect that we see a
geologist for example in my state
Washington on the west coast might go to
Eastern Washington see a layer of ash
and say HM how do I explain that white
ash among the in the Palouse soil well
different hypotheses might be proposed
maybe it was a flood maybe it was an
earthquake maybe it was a volcanic
eruption which one is best using
Darwin's method well it's the volcanic
eruption because what we know from our
experience is that volcanoes produce
that effect whereas floods and
earthquakes don't so there there's a
different type of testability for
historical scientific theories having
said that intelligent design also makes
discriminating predictions and in the
epilogue to our one of the appendices to
signature in the cell the first book I
lay out ten separate predictions that id
makes that are different that are
different that then the predictions that
a competing evolutionary model would
make one of them we've talked about
already the prediction about the
non-coding regions of the genome being
functional rather than junk so it and I
have a colleague Doug axe who is heading
up our lab the biologic Institute who's
doing all kinds of really interesting
experimental work so a lot of people
just they need to kind of take a lap
around the block whether it's here about
this and then it starts to make a little
more sense so I'm just shot the rosetta
stone didn't just happen that's the
first I've heard what about Mount
Rushmore cuz that's a same deal yeah
really
wind in a rosin baby wind in a row down
wave erosion see it's amazing how nature
plans and schemes yes sir so if we
accept your
axioms and agree with an intelligent
designer I'm curious your argument as to
why or if that intelligent designer is
necessarily a benevolent deity versus
say a vindictive group of aliens who are
taking bets on how many antelopes are
going to be eaten on the Serengeti on a
random Tuesday or a grad school a grad
student on Andromeda my debating partner
Michael ruse always has excellent
question
and notice though in the way I
formulated the argument scientifically
that I'm basing the inference to design
based on our uniform and repeated
experience in the present of those
causes which of which we know that are
capable of producing information or
irreducible complexity or circuitry or
the kind of things we find in organisms
because we know from our experience of
being conscious agents we have
experience in the presence of what minds
can do but the method of reasoning that
I use does not get you past the
affirmation of a mind simpliciter in
other words some kind of mind with the
capacities there that are similar or
analogous to ours
that but it does raise a second-order
question that goes beyond the use of the
scientific method as to the identity of
the designing intelligence that might be
responsible for the origin of life or
the origin of animal life and there are
different possibilities at the close of
the ben stein film that Eric talked
about Richard Dawkins of all people
actually speculated that perhaps there
is a signature of intelligence inside
the cell but if so he said it must have
been produced by an eminent intelligence
within the cosmos which itself evolved
through strictly material processes Ben
Stein called out the ABG hypothesis
anything but God but I hold in that
second-order deliberation to a theistic
view because I see evidence of design
not only in the history of life but I
see it from the very beginning of the
universe built into the fabric of the
universe itself in what the physicist
referred to as the fine-tuning of the
laws of physics and of the initial
conditions of the universe and I think
where as you might be able to invoke an
imminent intelligence within the cosmos
to account for the design we see in
biology clearly no being within the
cosmos could account for the
the design we see built into the very
fabric of the universe itself from the
beginning and so I think that overall
when you look at the range of evidences
of design that we see we have Jay
Richards here who's written on evidence
in physics and planetary astronomy I
think that the best explanation is a
theistic design hypothesis but I say
that that's a second-order philosophical
conclusion rather than something that
flows out of the scientific method that
I use in the books I normally say this
in stockton city i forgot to say it
earlier but both questions have have not
been too long but we want to limit them
to about fourteen syllables if you can
hang get the hang of that questions
we're fine at the ends and I want to
know not sure I know and I want to say
well we've been doing fine so far but
there's going to be couple of monologues
happening if unless we warn against it
and yes that the question must be
phrased in the form of a question
so go ahead sir do you think the
so-called young earthers completely lack
a scientific method or perhaps so they
just misinterpreting the facts because
some of them seem quite intelligent but
they're very some very intelligent young
earth scientists and I just happened to
hold a different view on the age of the
earth earth and the age of the universe
there - there's a kind of typology here
that might be helpful
everyone who accepts their young earth
and old earth creationists and both both
of those schools of thought like
intelligent design because if you're a
creationist there was a designer right
but if you accept intelligent design it
doesn't it doesn't follow that you
necessarily affirm young earth
creationism or older with creationism
the question of design or a parent
design is essentially an age neutral
question and so while I don't hold the
young earth view I can see how someone
might affirm intelligent design and have
a different view on the age question
than I do
thank you yes every once in a while I
see a triumphalist headline that says
evolution has been proved in the lab and
you'll have one more time more time
right so like in Michigan State they
went through 31,000 generations of
e.coli and then a strain emerge that
could metabolize citrate or applause
genetics came out with fruit flies that
could fly around
levels of oxygen that would be deficient
for earlier populations could you just
articulate and clarify what is being
proven and what is not being established
the dinies experiment really excellent
question there is a distinction in
evolutionary biology between what's
called macro and micro evolution and the
very oftentimes if you make that
distinction in an actual discussion
people will accuse that you have using
creationist terminology but this is
terminology within the discipline itself
and that the short quip I I cited a
minute ago natural selection explains
the survival but not the arrival it
explains small scale variation of the
kind these experiments demonstrate but
it does not account for fundamental
innovation in in body plan anatomical
structure and that's that sort of thing
so the kinds of things that are
trumpeted as proof positive are very
minor modifications that are typically
being achieved because of variations in
pre-existing genetic information and
they're drawing on pre-existing sources
of genetic information whereas macro
evolutionary change the origin of whole
new animals in the Cambrian period
requires huge infusions of new genetic
information and and so it's a really a
different a different kind of phenomenon
I'm not sure that we'll get to all the
questions I didn't say this earlier but
meant to as well that we always try to
end on time it Socrates in the city just
so you know that you don't have to sneak
out we will end certainly by 8:15
so yes sir oh I'm sorry yes yes had a
question both Darwinist and young horse
creation is to have a positive model of
how life was produced is it within the
scope of ID of ever producing a positive
model it seems like up until now has
been more of a negative criticism of why
Darwinism cannot be very glad you asked
that because the argument is often
missed portrayed as a fallacious
argument from ignorance if you know the
informal fallacies from logic or an
argument from personal incredulity but
the straight and I discuss this
objection head-on in both books the
argument for intelligent design is a
positive argument based on what we know
about the cause and effect structure of
the world not just a critique of the
inadequacy of the material
stick mechanisms I do critique those
mechanisms because the argument is
formulated is an inference to the best
explanation and to claim best you have
to show that the competing explanations
are inadequate but you also have to show
that there is a basis in an experience
for invoking another kind of cause and
and so the kind of cause that is invoked
to account for for example the origin of
the information necessary to build the
Cambrian animals is an intelligent cause
conscious and rational activity and we
invoke it because we have knowledge of
what conscious and rational agents can
produce in particular we know they can
produce information digital information
in other forms which is the crucial
feature of living systems that has to be
explained
so it's an argument based on our
knowledge of cause and effect and our
knowledge of the evidence of biological
systems not just our ignorance of an
alternative to neo-darwinism thank you
these questions are all very intelligent
and we could really use some dumb
questions so please you know something
just keep it simple
I like what's your wife's name or
something I read a terrible review of
your book and of all places in National
Review and it was performed by a
non-scientist neo-darwinism Alief Ines
his home at the Huffington Post
correct and I had had to then go and
read the discoveries Institute response
it up which was very thorough but I just
wondered if you had any background
information to how this happened to a
respectable one of the most respectable
conservative publications around like
National Review well political people
that farm books out for book review are
usually doing things on cultural and
political issues and so this guy is in
fact a hyper-partisan he does right at
the John Farrell is his name he's good
writer but he is not a scientist and
rather than engage any of the really
serious arguments of the book that we've
been discussing tonight he took issue
with a single ellipsis and attempted to
show that I was guilty of quote mining
or taking a quotation out of context and
I had 753 scientific references in the
book and so when I first read the review
skimmed it on the iPhone you know
driving home I thought well yeah not a
good policy
ha how fast were you drive yeah I
thought well I'm perfectly happy to you
know publish an errata and if I
mischaracterized a particular scientists
it didn't really bear on the argument I
was making but I got home and read read
the review carefully and then I read the
scientists at paleontologists named John
Marshall and what what and I found I
suddenly was incensed I didn't get this
guy wrong at all that I had a block
quotation and the first portion of the
quotation was about something called the
artifact hypothesis an explanation of
why the fossils are missing in the pre-k
pregnant Precambrian layers the second
part was also about the artifact
hypothesis in the second quotation
helpfully amplified the first standard
scholarly practice I then he faulted me
for not quoting another passage and that
passage was he said was put the whole
thing in a different context it was
about an entirely different topic and it
was entirely appropriate that I should
have excised it is it was about the
duration of the Cambrian explosion a
different technical matter so it was
really a poor review especially poor
because it didn't address the main
arguments of the book and I would have
welcomed spirited or thoughtful
criticism of those it just didn't come I
mean actually to throw my own two cents
in on that asking why would a wonderful
magazine like National Review do
something like that and by the way rich
Lowry is often here is he here now the
editor of national view maybe could you
know is a Marshall McLuhan in the
audience he can answer that
but I think oftentimes what happens and
this is why I'm interested in this on
one level is that it's a cultural debate
it's not just a scientific debate and
there are many people who would say well
oh I'm conservative but I'm not that
kind of a conservative you don't think I
believe in that stuff and I think there
probably many people whether they think
of themselves as libertarians or you
know particularly sophisticated
conservatives they would dismiss
anything that is let's say social
conservatism or any conservatism that or
any view that would would invoke a deity
they're just uncomfortable and so I'm
not I'm not so surprised I'm dismayed
but I'm not so surprised that let me
review what about let me defend National
Review
because I got an email just before we we
came over for the event from another in
our NRO writer who's going to do a piece
on the book he's very excited about it
so they'll be they'll be teaching the
controversy as we say within the pages
of n R which is a great policy on things
like this but I also want to speak to
the the social anxiety that that
surrounds this issue there is this
stigma and stereotype that anyone who's
questioning Darwinism is doing so in
fact this is the dominant narrative that
if that you know when Darwin came along
it was after centuries of people
believing in a divine creator then there
was this overwhelming scientific
evidence that overthrew that idea and
anyone who questions Darwin now is doing
so because they're an insecure religious
fundamentalist and one of the things I
try to do in the book is show there is a
really interesting scientific basis for
the dissenting opinion that is now
bubbling up all over the place in the
scientific community and that that
narrative is just simply if it was ever
true it's no longer true and and the
social you know it's the image of the
white shoed bible-thumper from a very
rural place who drools you know and
careful because they're two in the back
yeah but they're always they always show
up they're wonderful people but but you
don't you just don't they're clear
assume very very scientifically
sophisticated and and descent and it
needs to be heard as part of the
discussion the other thing I'd say is
that I think many of the policy and
cultural magazines they sense but don't
entirely entirely recognize why this
issue is important to everything else
they care about the Wall Street Journal
had a great cartoon a little while ago
in their salt and pepper cartoon you
know that they do on the op-ed page and
it was a hapless guy before a judge and
he says not guilty by reason of millions
of years of evolutionary selection for
aggressive behavior your honor and it's
a funny cartoon but actually I went back
and looked at this the first instance of
what's called the diminished
responsibility play the you know I did
it because I was insane was actually
made by Clarence Darrow in 1924 in the
famous Leopold and Loeb case the the
thriller murder case two young
University of Chicago college students
killed a twelve-year-old boy for the
thrill of it to show their independence
from booze while morality and they were
convicted at the point of sentencing the
sale you sent out Darrow and he argued
that yes they did have defective moral
machinery but they had such a defective
moral machinery because they were the
product of an unguided undirected
mindless evolutionary process you know
not not Flip Wilson the devil made me do
it
Flip Wilson you know my evolutionary
history did I just can't tell you how I
love the fact that you Reverend Flip
Wilson you've made my night okay go
ahead sir could everything have been
designed in if to what I'll call the
primordial soup where all the radiation
you know even the Cambrian explosion
could have been programmed front-end
loaded front-end loader a way that you
know one or two cell embryo can radiate
into a very complicated you know
organism excellent question
I'll try to be brief since we're running
out of time but that's that's entirely a
matter of the empirical data it could be
either and there are proponents of
intelligent design who think everything
was front-end loaded at the beginning of
the universe others who see it at the
beginning of life I actually hold the
view that that there were multiple
infusions of new information along the
way there's in the interest of time
there is a video of the under 30s at our
office who are tech whizzes have created
a YouTube channel of videos and there's
one on this very question could the
design that we see in evidence have been
front-end loaded could you explain the
origin of life from the fine-tuning of
the laws of physics at the very
beginning I think there's a good
scientific reason that you couldn't
there's not enough information in that
fine-tuning to account for the
information you need to build a cell so
I think we're looking at multiple
infusions of information if you will but
to explain why we take a little more
time than we have tonight but I'd refer
you to that video it's a great question
and it is an open question for people
who are open to considering design it's
not a one size fit all there's different
models of intelligent design that that
scientists are developing many people
right now are looking into the works of
album planning as a philosopher of
science right and if I'm not mistaking
you how I write and philosophy of
science and and many people seem to have
this view that you and him and kind of
like antithetical oh you know in in some
ways of like either because he believes
in like guide
evolution and you know well yeah let me
clarify his position because we just had
a lout to the I've known him since the
80s and he's been really a friend of the
ID movement what his main work in the in
the philosophy of science has been
challenging this principle known as
methodological naturalism that says that
scientists must limit themselves to
materialistic explanations even if
they're looking at the rosetta stone or
digital information in DNA and he says
no there's no presumption of a
materialistic explanation we need to be
open to all explanations he's making an
evolution of much more narrow logical
point that randomness might be what we
look at as randomness might be there
might be hidden hand behind it and so
he's also deeply skeptical about the
scientific evidence for neo-darwinism so
I the the the I think they're very few
differences actually between planning
and most of the leaders in the ID
movement there have been some
interesting discussions about this issue
of randomness Jay Richards my colleague
has had some very good online
discussions with Al on these questions
I'd refer you to those there are some
some slight differences in opinion about
the extent to which Darwinism is
inherently committed to a materialistic
approach and the extent to which it
might be harmonized abou if you will
with some sort of guidance but if there
is guidance to the mechanism that would
be a form of intelligent design yeah so
my question was are you is there any
difference between you and if not which
you have said that like it is what is it
or is it you know yeah the difference
and we had a really good discussion
about this and so we're you know we're
all learning from each other on it but I
think the main difference would be the
extent to which the mechanism of natural
selection random variation could be
understood to be a teleological process
could be guided okay and I I think if it
is guided then it's certainly a mode of
intelligent design just as there are
young earth creationist old earth
creationists who are proponents of
intelligent design there are theistic
evolutionist who would also wear that
moniker there's a common view if there's
a mind involved as a causal agent that's
intelligent design
whether it's gradual or episodic but
there's a technical point about
Darwinism Kant is the mechanism of
natural selection inherently an unguided
mechanism I think it's built into the
logic of the argument that Darwin makes
in the third chapter of the Origin that
it's inherently unguided mechanism
because he sets up natural selection in
opposition to artificial selection
intelligent selection and says look
nature can do what the breeder can do
and but I do acknowledge that you could
have you could see you could conceive of
something that looks unguided that might
have a mind behind it but when you the
real crucial question is that appearance
of design that we actually see in the
evidence and and if you acknowledge that
that appearance is the result of actual
design then you're in the ID camp
whether you say well God was guiding
something or it was more episodic or or
creation by Fiat so I think the
difference is on that level are there
really fine points of logic about what
is Darwin saying thank you dr. Maier
with the advances in research in the
semi cultural acceptance it's growing
around intelligent design do you see it
being taught in schools at the very
least even in loan size a theory with
evolution sometime in the near future
well it is being discussed with various
degrees of openness and or suppression
at the university level there is a case
right now in ball a Ball State
University in Indiana there are two
prominent ID proponents in the Astronomy
Department there one Jay Richards is
co-author Guillermo Gonzalez and the
other astronomer there Erica Dean has
been the subject of a kind of secular
witch-hunt really the Freedom From
Religion Foundation started pressuring
the university to shut down of course he
was doing in on the boundaries of
science because he had two books that
were discussing intelligent design one
Pro one con which i think is just absurd
but many many college professors
discussing these issues both in science
classes and in in philosophy of science
classes and thereby exercising their
academic freedom in the at the level of
the high school curriculum battles where
this comes up I think it would be
constitutionally permissible
I think intelligent design is a
scientific theory that has larger
worldview or metaphysical
locations and I think Darwinism is is a
scientific theory that has competing
metaphysical and worldview implications
so teaching one teaching them
side-by-side teaching about these
theories without being without trying to
indoctrinate students I think would be
it should be constitutionally
permissible however I think it's
imprudent for our side right now to be
trying to push intelligent design into
the public school textbook battles
because there's such confusion about
church-state jurisprudence that in error
inevitably a sensible policy is going to
kick this up into the courts and for us
we want our scientists working on the
science right now we're trying to
prosecute this argument at the highest
levels of the Academy not getting
instead of getting drawn into cases like
Dover where you had the absurdity of a
federal judge trying to decide the
definitional question of what is science
which is properly within the Providence
of the the philosophy of science so
right now we think it's imprudent to try
to force intelligent design into the
schools when the Dover trial was in the
news 2005 there had been one
peer-reviewed article in mainstream
science journals advocating the theory
of intelligent design it was that new
now we're approaching a hundred and at
some point the trickle becomes a rivulet
becomes a stream becomes a gush and
there are just too many scientists doing
signs from this perspective to keep it
out of the educational system students
are going to want to know that we're
going to ask their teachers teachers are
going to want to talk about it so I
prefer to let happen organically than to
have a big policy push that's art in our
position okay we've got time for two
very brief questions and and two brief
answers so go ahead I've seen a lot of
discussions with scientists on the
evolutionary side where they can almost
come to grips with the idea of
intelligent design but they they define
away intelligence to make it seem
mechanistic is there a difference I mean
is it really the word personal that
throws them for loop is there a
difference well there you get into some
very deep questions in the philosophy of
mind and I accept consciousness as I
another interesting figure in this
discussion is Thomas Nagel who's written
a book
mind and cosmos subtitle with Oxford
press last fall
how the neo-darwinian materialist view
of reality is almost certainly false and
one of the things that Nagel is arguing
is that that consciousness is a
fundamental feature of the world minds
our fundamental features of the world
they can't be reduced or explained away
by the the movement of molecules in in
synapses that that that and and I think
that we know of our conscious Minds by
direct introspective experience I
actually think we know of that better
than we know of any conclusion that is
rendered to us from science because all
scientific conclusions are mediated to
us by the senses and through scientific
authorities and so any any scientific
theory that removes consciousness and
and mind as a reality in other words
that it's so reductive in materialistic
that it eliminates what we know best
which is our own reality as conscious
agents is is a self contradictory form
of scientism and and so for me the
notion of any notion of mind which is
fundamentally reduced to just an
epiphenomenon of matter is actually an
incoherent view now I've been asked
could you be a physical astounded
advocate intelligent design I think that
is a possible position but I think is
ultimately incoherent because I rejected
is Achilles account of the mind-body
problem
thank you the final question I have to
say I didn't even know there was such a
word as physicalist I really didn't
thank you it's simply the idea that the
mind is reducible to molecules actually
how physical is different from
materialists very similar it's very
simple ISM is the is the expression of
materialism in in the philosophy of mind
or cognitive science okay as Christians
the basis of our faith is based on the
belief in the possibility of the
supernatural from the resurrection of
Christ to the virgin birth and the only
place where that notion of the
supernatural has a problem is in the
cosmopolitan West not in the rest of the
world per se and could an argument be
made with respect to this why does the
scientific community reject even the
possibility of the super
natural as an explanation for things
when they recognize for example that
there was a paradigm that we had with
Newtonian physics that was upset by
Einstein where everything changed with
that why isn't there an ability to
recognize that there might be paradigms
that they're not taking into account
again showing complexity or things
they've not taken into account that
might bring in what we would call the
supernatural things beyond our
understanding why is that unscientific
to even explore that possibility but
yeah that's a really great and
thoughtful question and there's a long
story of course and it's the story of
the establishment of scientific
materialism is the dominant philosophy
associated with science much of that
occurred in the late 19th century at
Darwin giving a materialist account of
origins you had marks with a utopian
materialistic dialectical materialist
vision of the future and Freud giving a
materialist account of human nature
Skinner other major figures so we've
been hit we have in a sense we're
working off the intellectual capital of
the late 19th century and it's still
with us and it's it's it is cracking up
and it's dissipating I think many modern
scientists some simply are operating in
that stream in a very conventional way
but others are thoughtful about it we'll
argue that we need the materialist
methodology to make progress in science
and I think here we barely advocates of
intelligent design bear a burden of
demonstration to show that looking at
life in a non materialistic way as a
design system can bear fruit in science
I think it can I think it already is and
I think the history of science
interestingly has already shown that if
you go back to the the Scientific
Revolution to Kepler and Newton and
Boyle and Galileo these these early
founders of modern science we're
operating out of an explicitly theistic
framework Newton always gets tagged as
being the author of the great
mechanistic universe but his
understanding of gravity was profoundly
anti-materialistic this is the
fundamental law for Newton was
gravitation he thought it was absolutely
mysterious that that there would be
action at a distance that there would be
a force transmitted through empty space
from the earth to the moon for example
and in the end he thought that gravity
was only
explain as an expression of God's quote
constant spirit action so the the the
theistic view of reality that gave rise
to modern science in the period we call
the Scientific Revolution was incredibly
fruitful and I think it can be and is
already again if we think about design
is essentially a theistic friendly
construct I think that it will be
heuristic aliy fruitful and already is
proving to be so but I do take seriously
the objection of our materialist
colleagues who want to see the proof in
the pudding thank you very much you know
heuristic alee that's the magic word of
the evening thank you very much I tell
you we could go on and on this is a this
is delightful thank you for coming
trying to think what we have to say
first of all in just a moment somebody's
going to whisk a table or something I
think up here where does anybody know
where the book signing is happening is
their table they're all ready okay so if
those of you who are interested in
having dr. Maier sign your book or the
book that you're about to purchase um
and please do
so thank you for coming